Let's look at both the symbol
and substance
of what the president announced
today and
what its impact is likely to be.
John Feinblatt is the president
of Everytown
for Gun Safety, which was
created after the
Newtown shootings and supported
in part by
former New York City Mayor
Michael Bloomberg.
And David Kopel, he is research
director at
The Independence Institute. It's
a libertarian
think tank. And he's well --
also an adjunct
professor of constitutional law
at the University
of Denver.
And we welcome both of you.
John Feinblatt, is the president
on the right
track with these moves that he
says are going
to reduce the number of gun
deaths?
JOHN FEINBLATT, Everytown for
Gun Safety:
Yes, I think what the president
did today
was pretty straightforward.
What he did was took some
actions to enforce
laws already on the books. One
was, he clarified
the law, that, if you're in the
business of
selling guns, you need to get a
license and
do a background check.
And the second is, he said that
he was going
to devote the resources to
enforce it. And
I think that, when you combine
clarifying
the law with additional
enforcement resources,
what you're going to do is
interrupt some
commercial sellers who are
actually taking
advantage of loopholes in the
laws, not getting
a license, and selling without
background
checks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Kopel, do
you -- excuse
me for interrupting.
David Kopel, do you agree the
president is
generally on the right track
with this?
DAVID KOPEL, The Independence
Institute: Well,
I agree with most of what Mr.
Feinblatt just
said, because the president
didn't do anything
at all that changes the law.
He just very forcefully and
passionately restated
what has been the law since
1968, which is,
if you are engaged in the
business, as the
statute says, of selling
firearms, then you
have to have a federal firearms
license. And
of course he's correct that that
mandate is
the same whether you sell in
your basement
or at a gun store or on the
Internet or at
a gun show.
And it's always been like that.
So, he restated
it. He didn't change anything,
but I think
it's fine to remind people who
might not know
about that requirement that it
exists.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John
Feinblatt, it's really
not that much of a change? It's
just a matter
of enforcing what was already
there?
JOHN FEINBLATT: Look, the law
has been blurry.
It's always -- the law has been,
if you're
engaged in the business of
selling guns, you
need to get a license and do
background checks.
But the problem was that there
was never any
meat on the bone. So, people
didn't know what
engaged in the business actually
meant. And
so what the president did today,
which was
very significant, was, he
actually indicated
what would be the criteria to
know whether
you were engaged in business.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are some of
those criteria?
JOHN FEINBLATT: So, did you buy
a gun and
recently resell it? And, so,
clearly, you're
in it for commerce. It's not
part of your
own collection? It is new in the
box with
price tags already on it?
Are you -- do you have business
cards printed
that actually show that you're
repeatedly
selling guns? Are you showing up
at gun shows
month after month? Things like
that. They're
commonsense, but they are very
important,
because what they're offering is
guidance
to both law enforcement and to
people who
are selling guns about who needs
to get a
license and who doesn't.
And then by saying that he would
put enforcement
might behind it, what I think
will happen
is that you will see dealers
becoming licensed,
doing background checks, where,
heretofore,
they hadn't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, David Kopel,
just spelling
out some of these specifics
could lead to
a reduction in gun deaths?
DAVID KOPEL: Well, it will lead
to the public
being better informed.
I read the guidance document
that the ATF
published today. And it was
fine. It adhered
very closely to the statutory
definition enacted
by Congress and then provided
some examples.
And part of what it did was
based on court
cases interpreting the statute.
So, that's good. And I think it
will lead
to more people getting federal
firearms licenses,
which is necessary to be engaged
in the business
of selling guns, because what
the president
is doing is implicitly reversing
a Clinton
era policy, which was to revoke
dealers' licenses
because, supposedly, they
weren't selling
enough guns to count as being
engaged in the
business.
So, 200,000 people lost their
firearms licenses
under the Clinton administration
program,
so, hopefully, this is a step to
restore those
licenses that probably never
should have been
taken away.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Kopel, what
about some
of the other things the
president is talking
about, spending more money on
mental health,
making mental health treatment
more available,
spending money to advance
research to make
guns safer in the hands of
children? What
about those things? Will those
make a difference?
DAVID KOPEL: Oh, the mental
health is really
important, and we, as a country,
tend to only
focus on it when there's these
notorious crimes
committed by a severely mentally
ill person.
But just on a day-to-day basis,
one out of
five prisoners in state prisons
for homicide
is seriously mentally ill. And,
of course,
people with mental illness are
victimized
by violent crime at a much
higher rate than
the general population.
So, I applaud the president for
putting resources
towards that, and that's
something we ought
to be working on constantly. And
both sides
of the gun debate ought to be
able to come
together to support helping
mentally ill people,
not stigmatizing them, not
having punitive
harsh laws against people, but
just giving
people treatment resources.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Feinblatt,
given the fact
that, I mean, just at least the
two of you
agree, coming from somewhat
different places
on this, how do you explain the
very vocal
opposition out there?
(CROSSTALK)
JOHN FEINBLATT: Well, it's
interesting, because
it's not just me and David. It's
actually
90 percent of Americans.
So, 90 percent of Americans
believe in universal
background checks. Gun owners
believe in it.
Even NRA members, 74 percent of
NRA members
do. And so this is what the
American public
actually wants. And the
president is taking
steps to do it.
You know, for years, we have
heard these issues
that, if the president acts,
he's going to
take people's guns away, he's
confiscating
guns, it's a slippery slope. And
I think David
and I agree that background
checks can save
lives. Americans believe in it.
And all the president is really
doing today
is enforcing the laws already on
the books,
which is what people who oppose
any efforts
at gun safety always say: Why
don't you just
enforce the laws on the books?
So, it's surprising to hear that
today, when,
in fact, what the president has
done is exactly
what people have called for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, David Kopel,
though, is
there more the president -- is
there more
-- what more could -- let me put
it this way.
What more could Congress do to
make it harder
for a gun to be in the hands of
someone who
is going to commit a terrible
crime?
DAVID KOPEL: Well, I think as
Mr. Feinblatt
said, enforcing existing laws.
The -- we have cases where
people have been
straw purchasers. That's
somebody where you're
a legal buyer, but you're buying
on behalf
of someone else, so that they
can avoid the
background check and get the
gun. And that's
a very common way that criminals
get guns.
And the background check system
can't stop
that.
And the Obama administration's
prosecution
of straw purchase cases has been
very lax,
especially compared to the
previous administration.
JOHN FEINBLATT: So, the most
important thing
that you can do is pass
universal background
checks.
Eighteen states have passed
universal background
checks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which the U.S.
doesn't have.
We don't have that now.
JOHN FEINBLATT: Which the U.S.
doesn't have.
But we're going -- we're moving
state by state.
And in the past year or two, you
have seen
Oregon, Colorado, Washington
state, in two
cases by the legislature, in one
case by ballot.
And if you look at the states
that have passed
universal background checks, 48
percent fewer
homicides of cops, 48 percent
fewer domestic
homicides with guns, almost half
the amount
of trafficking.
Background checks work. And it's
important
to know that that's the step
that we have
to do. That's the final step
here. It's the
major step.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, David Kopel,
that's not
what the president has done so
far. It's not
what he's doing today. Would
that make a huge
difference in unnecessary gun
deaths, universal
background checks?
DAVID KOPEL: Well, we have one
of these Bloomberg
laws that was passed in
Colorado. And I'm
currently representing most of
the state sheriffs
in federal court in a lawsuit
against it because
it's so badly structured.
It makes it very difficult for
people to teach
gun safety classes. For example,
the Washington
analogue, it's illegal if you're
a gun safety
instructor to hand a gun to a
student empty,
unloaded, and show the student
how to handle
it. Those are -- these are
ridiculous laws.
They're not universal background
checks.
The Colorado law was so badly
structured that
it actually reduced the number
of people getting
background checks because it
made them so
difficult to obtain. So,
whatever polls say
about the theory of background
checks, the
practice and the laws pushed by
Everytown
has been terrible and highly
destructive to
the shooting sports and
responsible gun use.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly, so
it sounds
like, once one gets beyond what
the president
suggested today, you do see
opposition?
JOHN FEINBLATT: You see it, but
you see it
-- certainly, David objects it
to, but every
poll would show that 90 percent
of Americans
believe in universal background
checks, whether
you're a gun owner, whether
you're not a gun
owner, whether you live in a
rural community
or an urban community.
It's what the American public
wants. It's
what the people of Washington
state voted
for on their own at the ballot,
and it's what
state legislatures are passing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and, today,
we're looking
at what the president did
through his executive
actions.
JOHN FEINBLATT: That's correct.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Feinblatt,
David Kopel,
we thank you both.
DAVID KOPEL: Thank you.
JOHN FEINBLATT: Thank you.